# **Machine Learning to predict Peptide detectability in LC-MS/MS Proteomics**
This project dissertation is submitted for my MSc in Bioinformatics at Queen Mary University of London.
***
## **Abstract**
In proteomics, the accurate prediction of peptide detectability in mass spectrometry (MS) experiments is pivotal for enhancing the efficiency and effectiveness of proteomic analyses. In shotgun proteomics, the inherent variability of experiments results in a situation where a majority proportion of peptides remain undetected, resulting in protein sequences being with limited or low coverage and ambiguity groups of protein. The notion of peptide detectability emerges as a valuable tool in addressing the ambiguity, as it allows for a more robust assessment of protein identifications by leveraging the information provided by the detectability scores of the corresponding peptides. The ultimate purpose or goal is to use the peptide detectability concept as a means to improve the accuracy and certainty of identifying proteins in mass spectrometry, thereby advancing the field of proteomics. This study aims to enhance peptide detectability prediction by addressing certain factors that are known to affect the detectability of peptides and in order to fulfil the aim, the approach studied involves improving the performance of the transformer-based neural network model with fine-tuned hyper-parameters, training a combination of features including the sequence, spectral count based NSAF, and physicochemical properties to the model along with data cleaning and pre-processing of datasets for machine learning tasks. This study's outcome indicates improvement of the model to be able to predict peptide detectability accurately.

**Keywords:** Peptide detectability, Transformers, Sequence, SpC-NSAF, Physicochemical, LC-MS/MS Proteomics.
***
## **Acknowledgement**
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my supervisor, Prof. Conrad Bessant. Your invaluable guidance, support, and encouragement have been instrumental in the completion of this dissertation. From the initial stages of defining my research topic to the final stages of writing and revision, your expertise and insightful feedback have been crucial in shaping my work. Your patience and understanding have made this challenging journey a rewarding experience.
